isabelle-assistant/prompts/refactor_to_isar.md, before:

<!-- Variables: proof (required), context (optional) -->
Convert this apply-style proof to structured Isar for Isabelle2025-2.

```isabelle
{{proof}}
```
{{#context}}

## Available Context
```
{{context}}
```
{{/context}}

## Isar Proof Structure Guide
- Use `proof (method)` ... `qed` for the outer structure
- Use `have` for intermediate facts, `show` for the final goal
- Use `then` or `from` to chain facts, `hence`/`thus` as shorthand
- Use `fix` for universal variables, `assume` for hypotheses
- Use `next` to separate subgoals within a proof block
- Use `by method` for one-step proofs of intermediate facts

## Examples

### Example 1: Simple induction
Before:
```isabelle
lemma length_append: "length (xs @ ys) = length xs + length ys"
  apply (induction xs)
  apply simp
  apply simp
  done
```

After:
```isabelle
lemma length_append: "length (xs @ ys) = length xs + length ys"
proof (induction xs)
  case Nil
  then show ?case by simp
next
  case (Cons a xs)
  then show ?case by simp
qed
```

### Example 2: Case analysis
Before:
```isabelle
lemma hd_in_set: "xs ≠ [] ⟹ hd xs ∈ set xs"
  apply (cases xs)
  apply simp
  apply simp
  done
```

After:
```isabelle
lemma hd_in_set: "xs ≠ [] ⟹ hd xs ∈ set xs"
proof (cases xs)
  case Nil
  then show ?thesis by simp
next
  case (Cons a list)
  then show ?thesis by simp
qed
```

Preserve the mathematical content exactly. Each `apply` step should become a named intermediate fact where possible. Output ONLY the refactored Isabelle code from the lemma statement through `qed`.

Wrap the output in ```isabelle code fences.

Commit message:

Refactor LLM output parsing to use strict JSON schemas
This commit transitions the Isabelle Assistant from brittle, regex-based string parsing to structured JSON schemas for all major LLM-driven actions to improve reliability when extracting code, proofs, and commands.

Key changes:
- ResponseParser.scala: Added extractJsonObjectString and parseStringField utilities for resilient JSON extraction and safe field reading.
- Prompts: Updated instructions in extract_lemma.md, refactor_to_isar.md, tidy.md, suggest.md, and their retry variants to strictly evaluate against structured JSON formats.
- ExtractLemmaAction: Parses {"extracted_lemma": "...", "updated_proof": "..."} instead of splitting string blocks by heading names.
- RefactorAction & TidyAction: Parses {"code": "..."} directly.
- SuggestAction: Parses {"suggestions": ["..."]} and eliminates hardcoded proof method heuristic fallbacks.
- SuggestActionParserTest.scala: Rewritten to use JSON-formatted mock LLM responses.

Signed-off-by: Dominic Mulligan <dominic.p.mulligan@gmail.com>

isabelle-assistant/prompts/refactor_to_isar.md, after:

<!-- Variables: proof (required), context (optional) -->
Convert this apply-style proof to structured Isar for Isabelle2025-2.

```isabelle
{{proof}}
```
{{#context}}

## Available Context
```
{{context}}
```
{{/context}}

## Isar Proof Structure Guide
- Use `proof (method)` ... `qed` for the outer structure
- Use `have` for intermediate facts, `show` for the final goal
- Use `then` or `from` to chain facts, `hence`/`thus` as shorthand
- Use `fix` for universal variables, `assume` for hypotheses
- Use `next` to separate subgoals within a proof block
- Use `by method` for one-step proofs of intermediate facts

## Examples

### Example 1: Simple induction
Before:
```isabelle
lemma length_append: "length (xs @ ys) = length xs + length ys"
  apply (induction xs)
  apply simp
  apply simp
  done
```

After:
```isabelle
lemma length_append: "length (xs @ ys) = length xs + length ys"
proof (induction xs)
  case Nil
  then show ?case by simp
next
  case (Cons a xs)
  then show ?case by simp
qed
```

### Example 2: Case analysis
Before:
```isabelle
lemma hd_in_set: "xs ≠ [] ⟹ hd xs ∈ set xs"
  apply (cases xs)
  apply simp
  apply simp
  done
```

After:
```isabelle
lemma hd_in_set: "xs ≠ [] ⟹ hd xs ∈ set xs"
proof (cases xs)
  case Nil
  then show ?thesis by simp
next
  case (Cons a list)
  then show ?thesis by simp
qed
```

Preserve the mathematical content exactly. Each `apply` step should become a named intermediate fact where possible. You MUST respond with exactly a single JSON object containing the refactored code, ensuring newlines and quotes are properly escaped:

```json
{
  "code": "lemma foo:\nproof\n  ...\nqed"
}
```

CRITICAL: The output MUST be strictly valid JSON. Do NOT add any conversational text before or after the JSON block.
