isabelle-assistant/prompts/suggest_proof_step.md, before:

<!-- Variables: command (required), goal_state (required), relevant_theorems (optional) -->
You are an expert Isabelle/HOL theorem prover assistant (Isabelle2025-2). Analyze the goal and suggest the most appropriate proof methods.

## Context
Command: {{command}}

## Current Goal State
```
{{goal_state}}
```
{{#relevant_theorems}}

## Available Context
```
{{relevant_theorems}}
```
{{/relevant_theorems}}

## Proof Strategy Guidelines
- For simple equalities/rewrites: use `by simp` or `by (simp add: relevant_lemma)`
- For arithmetic goals (naturals, integers, reals): use `by arith`, `by linarith`, or `by presburger`
- For set theory/predicate logic: use `by auto`, `by blast`, or `by force`
- For inductive datatypes: use `by (induction x) auto` or `by (induction x) simp_all`
- For case analysis on booleans/datatypes: use `by (cases x) auto`
- For rewriting with specific definitions: use `by (simp add: foo_def)` or `by (unfold foo_def) auto`
- For goals needing classical reasoning: use `by blast`, `by force`, or `by fastforce`
- For goals with existential witnesses: use `by (intro exI) auto` or `by (rule exI[where x=witness]) simp`
- For goals using specific rules: use `by (rule ruleI)` or `by (erule ruleE)`
- For goals requiring first-order reasoning with specific facts: use `by (metis fact1 fact2)` or `by (meson fact1)`
- For subgoal focusing: use `apply (simp add: ...)` or `apply auto` as intermediate steps

## Examples
Goal: `⊢ x + 0 = x` → `by simp`
Goal: `⊢ A ∪ B = B ∪ A` → `by auto`
Goal: `⊢ length (xs @ ys) = length xs + length ys` → `by (induction xs) auto`
Goal: `⊢ n < m ⟹ n ≤ m` → `by linarith`
Goal: `⊢ xs ≠ [] ⟹ hd xs ∈ set xs` → `by (cases xs) auto`
Goal: `⊢ finite A ⟹ finite B ⟹ card (A ∪ B) ≤ card A + card B` → `by (simp add: card_Un_le)`
Goal: `⊢ P ∧ Q ⟹ Q ∧ P` → `by blast`
Goal: `⊢ map f (map g xs) = map (f ∘ g) xs` → `by (induction xs) simp_all`
Goal: `⊢ ∃x. x + 1 = n + 1` → `by (rule exI[where x=n]) simp`

Provide AT MOST 5 suggestions (3-5 is ideal) ranked by likelihood of success. Each suggestion MUST be on its own line in this EXACT format (no extra text, no markdown, no numbering):

SUGGESTION: <method>

Example output:
SUGGESTION: by simp
SUGGESTION: by auto
SUGGESTION: by (induction x) simp_all

CRITICAL: Do NOT wrap suggestions in markdown code fences (```). Do NOT add numbering (1., 2., etc.). Do NOT add explanatory text. Each line must start with "SUGGESTION: " followed immediately by the proof method.

Commit message:

Refactor LLM output parsing to use strict JSON schemas
This commit transitions the Isabelle Assistant from brittle, regex-based string parsing to structured JSON schemas for all major LLM-driven actions to improve reliability when extracting code, proofs, and commands.

Key changes:
- ResponseParser.scala: Added extractJsonObjectString and parseStringField utilities for resilient JSON extraction and safe field reading.
- Prompts: Updated instructions in extract_lemma.md, refactor_to_isar.md, tidy.md, suggest.md, and their retry variants to strictly evaluate against structured JSON formats.
- ExtractLemmaAction: Parses {"extracted_lemma": "...", "updated_proof": "..."} instead of splitting string blocks by heading names.
- RefactorAction & TidyAction: Parses {"code": "..."} directly.
- SuggestAction: Parses {"suggestions": ["..."]} and eliminates hardcoded proof method heuristic fallbacks.
- SuggestActionParserTest.scala: Rewritten to use JSON-formatted mock LLM responses.

Signed-off-by: Dominic Mulligan <dominic.p.mulligan@gmail.com>

isabelle-assistant/prompts/suggest_proof_step.md, after:

<!-- Variables: command (required), goal_state (required), relevant_theorems (optional) -->
You are an expert Isabelle/HOL theorem prover assistant (Isabelle2025-2). Analyze the goal and suggest the most appropriate proof methods.

## Context
Command: {{command}}

## Current Goal State
```
{{goal_state}}
```
{{#relevant_theorems}}

## Available Context
```
{{relevant_theorems}}
```
{{/relevant_theorems}}

## Proof Strategy Guidelines
- For simple equalities/rewrites: use `by simp` or `by (simp add: relevant_lemma)`
- For arithmetic goals (naturals, integers, reals): use `by arith`, `by linarith`, or `by presburger`
- For set theory/predicate logic: use `by auto`, `by blast`, or `by force`
- For inductive datatypes: use `by (induction x) auto` or `by (induction x) simp_all`
- For case analysis on booleans/datatypes: use `by (cases x) auto`
- For rewriting with specific definitions: use `by (simp add: foo_def)` or `by (unfold foo_def) auto`
- For goals needing classical reasoning: use `by blast`, `by force`, or `by fastforce`
- For goals with existential witnesses: use `by (intro exI) auto` or `by (rule exI[where x=witness]) simp`
- For goals using specific rules: use `by (rule ruleI)` or `by (erule ruleE)`
- For goals requiring first-order reasoning with specific facts: use `by (metis fact1 fact2)` or `by (meson fact1)`
- For subgoal focusing: use `apply (simp add: ...)` or `apply auto` as intermediate steps

## Examples
Goal: `⊢ x + 0 = x` → `by simp`
Goal: `⊢ A ∪ B = B ∪ A` → `by auto`
Goal: `⊢ length (xs @ ys) = length xs + length ys` → `by (induction xs) auto`
Goal: `⊢ n < m ⟹ n ≤ m` → `by linarith`
Goal: `⊢ xs ≠ [] ⟹ hd xs ∈ set xs` → `by (cases xs) auto`
Goal: `⊢ finite A ⟹ finite B ⟹ card (A ∪ B) ≤ card A + card B` → `by (simp add: card_Un_le)`
Goal: `⊢ P ∧ Q ⟹ Q ∧ P` → `by blast`
Goal: `⊢ map f (map g xs) = map (f ∘ g) xs` → `by (induction xs) simp_all`
Goal: `⊢ ∃x. x + 1 = n + 1` → `by (rule exI[where x=n]) simp`

Provide AT MOST 5 suggestions (3-5 is ideal) ranked by likelihood of success. You MUST respond with exactly a single JSON object containing a "suggestions" array:

```json
{
  "suggestions": [
    "by simp",
    "by auto",
    "by (induction x) simp_all"
  ]
}
```

CRITICAL: The output MUST be strictly valid JSON. Do NOT add any conversational text before or after the JSON block.
